#  _    _          ___           __ _     (R)
# | |  (_)_ _____ / __|___ _ _  / _(_)__ _
# | |__| \ V / -_) (__/ _ \ ' \|  _| / _` |
# |____|_|\_/\___|\___\___/_||_|_| |_\__, |
#                                    |___/
# lcsam - LiveConfig SpamAssassin Milter

=pod

=head1 NAME

I<lcsam> - LiveConfig SpamAssassin Milter

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<lcsam> F<OPTIONS>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

I<lcsam> is a milter (Sendmail filter) service to check incoming e-mails with SpamAssassin and optionally tag or reject them.

=head1 OPTIONS

I<lcsam> accepts the following options:

=over 4

=item B<-a>

Also scan (outgoing) mails from SASL authenticated users

=item B<-A> F<SCORE>

Reject outgoing mails exceeding this SpamAssassin score (float value, must be between -1000.0 and 1000.0). A reasonable value might be around 3.0-5.0 points, depending on your SpamAssassin settings.

=item B<-c> F<PROTO:ADDR>

Communication socket for incoming connections:
 F<{unix|local}:/path/to/file>       -- a named pipe
 F<inet:port@{hostname|ip-address}>  -- an IPv4 socket
 F<inet6:port@{hostname|ip-address}> -- an IPv6 socket

Default value: F<unix:/var/run/lcsam.sock>

=item B<-d>

Debug mode - stay in foreground, print debug messages

=item B<-h>

Print usage informations.

=item B<-m> F<FILE>

Location of the user map file (default value: F</etc/postfix/spamassassin.db>)

=item B<-p> F<FILE>

Location of the PID file (default value: F</run/lcsam.pid>)

=item B<-r>

Add F<X-Spam-Report:> header containing detailed informations about all rules hit

=item B<-s> F<ADDRESS>

Address of SpamAssassin spamd to connect to. This can be either an ip address/hostname & port or a UNIX domain socket (default value: F</var/run/spamd.sock>)

=item B<-u> F<USER>

User to run I<lcsam> as (default: F<nobody>)

=item B<-g> F<GROUP>

Group to run I<lcsam> as (default: F<nogroup>)

=item B<-U> F<USER>

owner (user) of the UNIX domain socket (default: F<mail>)

=item B<-G> F<GROUP>

owner (group) of the UNIX domain socket (default: F<mail>)

=back

=head1 USER MAP FILE

The user map file contains a list of all e-mail adresses and their individual SpamAssassin settings (warn/reject threshold, prefix for subject modification, etc.). The format is:

 <EMailAddress> <FormatVersion> <WarnThres> <RejectThres> <RejectFlag> <ConfigPath> <SubjectPrefix>

=over 4

=item B<EMailAddress>

The key of the user map file (hash table). I<lcsam> converts mail addresses to lowercase before performing a lookup.

=item B<FormatVersion>

Currently must be F<1>. Future expansions possible.

=item B<WarnThres>

Threshold of SpamAssassin score to flag a mail as "suspect spam" (a good starting value is 3.0 points).

=item B<RejectThres>

Threshold of SpamAssassin score to reject a mail (more than 5.0 points are usually a safe indicator for spam).

=item B<RejectFlag>

F<1> = Reject mails having more then B<RejectThres> points, otherwise still accept them (for later filtering).

=item B<ConfigPath>

Part of path name to user-specific SpamAssassin configuration (must not contain any whitespace). This is submitted to SpamAssassin as B<User Name>. So best use this with SpamAssassin options B<-x> and B<--virtual-config-dir>.

=item B<SubjectPrefix>

This text is inserted before the message subject to indicate a spam suspicion. Use something like F<*** SPAM? ***>.

=back

The user map file is usually created as plain text file (eg. at F</etc/postfix/spamassassin>) and then converted to a hash map using the postmap(1) command.

Example:

 me@example.org    1 3.0 5.0 1 web1_123 *** SPAM? ***
 info@example.org  1 3.0 5.0 0 web1_234 *** SPAM? ***

=head1 SECURITY

When running SpamAssassin on a server where "normal" users also have access to (eg. on a typical "shared hosting" server), you should configure SpamAssassin to be accessible via a UNIX domain socket instead of a local network socket. So you can limit access to SpamAssassin through usual user permissions. Additionally, you should run SpamAssassin with an own, unprivileged user (eg. "spamd"), as this process doesn't require any direct access to mail or other user files.

I<lcsam> should also be run with an unprivileged user (for example also as "spamd"). The communication socket must be writable by Postfix, so you should set the according socket owner (eg. "-U postfix").

In a typical environment, a more or less "safe" setup could look like this:

=over 4

=item SpamAssassin:

 /usr/sbin/spamd --max-children 5 --helper-home-dir \
   --socketpath=/var/run/spamd.sock --socketowner=spamd \
   --socketgroup=root --socketmode=0700 \
   -x --virtual-config-dir=/var/lib/spamassassin/%u/ \
   -u spamd -d --pidfile=/var/run/spamd.pid

=item lcsam:

 /usr/lib/liveconfig/lcsam -u spamd -U postfix

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

postmap(1).

=head1 AUTHOR

LiveConfig GmbH E<lt>F<info@liveconfig.com>E<gt>

=cut
